Setting Up the ASP.NET Web Application Development Environment



1. Introduction
This document provides step-by-step instructions on setting up the development environment for the 'StudentReg' ASP.NET web application. It covers software installation, environment configuration, cloning the Git repository, and running the application.


2. Prerequisites
A Windows operating system (Windows 10 or later is recommended)
Administrative privileges to install software


3. Required Software
.NET SDK
Visual Studio 2022 (or later)
SQL Server Express (Optional for database integration)
Git (Optional for version control)


4. Installing .NET SDK
Download .NET SDK:

Visit the .NET SDK download page.
Download the latest stable version of the .NET SDK.
Install .NET SDK:

Run the downloaded installer.
Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
Verify .NET SDK Installation:

Open Command Prompt or PowerShell.
Run the command:  dotnet --version



5. Installing Visual Studio
Download Visual Studio:

Visit the Visual Studio download page.
Download the Community, Professional, or Enterprise edition as per your requirement.


Install Visual Studio:

Run the Visual Studio installer.
During the installation, select the following workloads:
ASP.NET and web development
.NET Core cross-platform development
Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
Verify Visual Studio Installation:

Open Visual Studio.
Go to Help > About Microsoft Visual Studio.
Ensure the installed version is listed correctly.


6. Optional: Installing SQL Server Express
Download SQL Server Express:

Visit the SQL Server Express download page.
Install SQL Server Express:

Run the downloaded installer.
Choose the Basic installation type for a quick setup.
Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
Install SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS):

Visit the SSMS download page.
Download and install SSMS.
Verify SQL Server Installation:

Open SSMS.
Connect to the SQL Server instance using (local)\SQLEXPRESS as the server name.



7. Optional: Installing Git
Download Git:

Visit the Git download page.
Install Git:

Run the downloaded installer.
Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
Verify Git Installation:

Open Command Prompt or PowerShell.
Run the command:   git --version



8. Cloning the Git Repository

Clone the Repository:

Open Command Prompt, PowerShell, or Git Bash.
Run the following command, replacing <repository-link> with the actual link you received:

"git clone <repository-link>"

eg: git clone https://github.com/yourusername/StudentReg.git


Navigate to the Project Directory:

Change directory to the cloned repository: "cd StudentReg"


9. Setting Up the Project in Visual Studio

Open Visual Studio:
Launch Visual Studio.

Open the Cloned Project:

Go to File > Open > Project/Solution.
Navigate to the 'StudentReg' directory and open the '.sln' file

Restore NuGet Packages:

Visual Studio should automatically restore the NuGet packages. If not, go to Tools > NuGet 'Package Manager' > 'Package Manager Console' and run:

Run the Application:

Press 'F5' or click the Run button to start the application.
The application should launch in your default web browser.

10. Conclusion
By following these steps, you have successfully set up your development environment for the 'StudentReg' ASP.NET web application. You are now ready to start developing and running the application.